1. Research Question or Problem. Strong abstracts will provide a clear description of the research question and/or education problem being addressed. A sound rationale should be provided as well as an appropriate model, theoretical framework, or philosophy of the study.
Is a clear research question and/or educational problem in biology education described?
Is there a sound rationale for the project?
Is a model, theoretical framework, or philosophy of the study adequately described?

2. Research Design. Strong abstracts will clearly describe the study’s context and/or literature base, as well as the research design and methods used. The abstract should provide enough information to demonstrate that the study’s design and methods are appropriate and well-aligned with the research question or problem being investigated.
Is the study context and/or literature base clearly described?
Are the research design and methods clearly described?
Are the design and methods appropriate and well-aligned with the research question or problem?

3. Analyses and Interpretations. Strong abstracts will clearly describe the analysis of the data, include a description of key results (e.g., numerical results and/or examples of qualitative data as appropriate to the study), and provide some interpretation of the findings. All claims made in the abstract should be clearly supported by evidence and appropriate to the focus of the study and its methodology. Reviewers will also consider the appropriate level of completeness of the project
based on the presentation format selected. While long and short talks are expected to have more thorough analyses (e.g., appropriate statistics, inclusion of diverse data streams, closer to publication), roundtables and poster presentations may include more preliminary data analyses.
Are the analyses clearly described?
Are claims supported by evidence and appropriate given the focus of the study and the methods?
Are the analyses at an appropriate level of completeness given the desired presentation format?

4. Contribution. Strong abstracts should add to, refine, or refute the literature base in biology education. The abstract should provide clear implications for teaching, learning, or research in biology. Reviewers will also consider whether the study is likely to be of general interest to SABER attendees. 
Does the study add to, refine, or refute the literature base in biology education?
Is the study likely to be of general interest to SABER attendees?
Does the study provide clear implications for teaching, learning, or research in biology?




RESEARCH PROBLEM
Biology offers explanation at multiple levels: first by establishing patterns and investigating their causal processes, and then by providing proximate and ultimate causes for observed patterns and processes. This dual causality -- the proximate functional 'how' and the ultimate evolutionary 'why' -- is of particular importance to biological sciences; the 'why' being the stuff that gives the 'how' consequence. Yet hundreds of studies demonstrate that students hold tenacious misconceptions regarding the evolutionary principles necessary for recognizing levels of biological explanation -- especially those related to the process of natural selection. While some work suggests that the focus in biology classrooms is more often on the proximate, few studies examine students' ability to distinguish the ultimate processes responsible for observed adaptations.

STUDY DESIGN
To explore how students construct their own explanations related to the process of natural selection -- and whether or not such explanations change following instruction -- I administered a pre-post assignment with five open-ended questions. The study spanned two semesters and included more than 600 students across four undergraduate biology courses, from introductory to advanced. My framework, adapted from Tinbergen's Four Questions, qualitatively categorized students' responses based on the level of explanation addressed (i.e., proximate or ultimate patterns and processes). I tallied the number of responses from each explanatory category both before and after instruction. I performed generalized linear models to assess possible correlations between the level of explanation invoked in each question and four other variables: the student's year of study, declared major, course affiliation, and number of previously earned credits in postsecondary biology courses. I also compared the observed distribution of students' levels of explanation between the pre- and post-assignments for each of the four variables.

ANALYSES AND INTERPRETATIONS
Irrespective of students' year of study, major, course affiliation, or number of previous credits in biology, more than 80 percent of explanations invoke ultimate patterns, proximate processes, or a combination of these two categories in a single answer, and shift often around explanatory categories both within and between assignments. Students are rarely able to distinguish ultimate processes, and their shifting answers suggest a lack of conceptual clarity regarding such concepts. There is also frequent use of familiar "schemas" or "cognitive construals" like anthropocentric and teleological reasoning. These findings suggest that without explicit and repeated reinforcement of explanatory categories across courses, students will likely continue to struggle with distinguishing between proximate and ultimate patterns and processes throughout their studies.

CONTRIBUTION
Dobzhansky famously said that nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution. As such, forming a robust conceptual framework in biology requires distinguishing patterns from the processes that generate them -- and distinguishing the functional and evolutionary explanations for such patterns and processes. Without these higher-order cognitive skills, students face an enormous challenge in their conceptual learning of evolution and of biology generally. Here I review the implications of these findings for the teaching and learning of biological sciences, and briefly touch on methods of explicitly addressing such cognitive skills in the classroom.